ARTICLE
Received 8 Oct 2015 | Accepted 6 Sep 2016 | Published 21 Oct 2016

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160

OPEN

Optimal bioenergy power generation for climate
change mitigation with or without carbon
sequestration
Dominic Woolf1, Johannes Lehmann1,2 & David R. Lee2,3

Restricting global warming below 2 °C to avoid catastrophic climate change will require
atmospheric carbon dioxide removal (CDR). Current integrated assessment models (IAMs)
and Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change scenarios assume that CDR within the
energy sector would be delivered using bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS).
Although bioenergy-biochar systems (BEBCS) can also deliver CDR, they are not included in
any IPCC scenario. Here we show that despite BECCS offering twice the carbon sequestration
and bioenergy per unit biomass, BEBCS may allow earlier deployment of CDR at lower carbon
prices when long-term improvements in soil fertility offset biochar production costs.
At carbon prices above $1,000 Mg  1 C, BECCS is most frequently (P40.45, calculated as
the fraction of Monte Carlo simulations in which BECCS is the most cost effective) the most
economic biomass technology for climate-change mitigation. At carbon prices below
$1,000 Mg  1 C, BEBCS is the most cost-effective technology only where biochar signiﬁcantly
improves agricultural yields, with pure bioenergy systems being otherwise preferred.

1 Soil and Crop Sciences, School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. 2 Atkinson Center for a Sustainable Future,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. 3 Charles H. Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York
14853, USA. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.W. (email: domwoolf@gmail.com).

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:13160 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

1

ARTICLE

A

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160

target rise in global mean temperature of less than 2 °C
has been widely advocated as necessary to prevent
dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate
system1,2. Most mitigation scenarios that achieve this include
widespread carbon dioxide removal (CDR) in the second half of
the century to compensate for residual emissions from sectors
where mitigation is costly and to recover from an overshoot of
CO2 emissions3. Therefore, CDR is critical to achieving climate
stabilization within safe limits. Hopes for CDR have largely
been pinned on the extensive deployment of bioenergy with
carbon capture and storage (BECCS), which is the only negative
emissions technology included in the mitigation scenarios of the
recent Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) ﬁfth
Assessment Report3. BECCS achieves a net removal of CO2
from the atmosphere by relying on photosynthesis to ﬁx CO2 and
interrupting the natural carbon cycle that would otherwise have
rapidly returned this carbon to the atmosphere during respiration
or combustion. Instead, BECCS sequesters the photosynthetically
ﬁxed carbon as post-combustion CO2 stored in a stable
reservoir4,5. However, BECCS may be costly and parts of the
technology are unproven6.
An alternative CDR approach is biochar (BC), in which
biomass is pyrolysed and the carbon-rich residue sequestered in
soil. BC, like BECCS, relies on photosynthesis to ﬁx CO2, followed
by storage of this ﬁxed carbon in a stable reservoir (in this case,
soil). As a co-beneﬁt, BC can improve the fertility of degraded or
less fertile soils7–9. It is also possible to co-produce bioenergy with
BC in a bioenergy-biochar system (BEBCS)10–12.
Within any mitigation scenario, BECCS and BEBCS must
compete for available biomass—with each other and also
with pure bioenergy systems (BES), which can also reduce
energy-sector carbon emissions by offsetting more carbon
intensive energy resources. Each of these technologies has
advantages and disadvantages. BES generates the greatest
bioenergy per unit biomass. BECCS sequesters the largest fraction
of biomass carbon, but generates less energy than BES at a higher
cost13,14. BEBCS produces the least energy and sequesters less
carbon than BECCS7,10,13,15, but it can enhance soil fertility16,17,
return nutrients to soil (although nitrogen may be largely lost or
inaccessible to plants after pyrolysis), and reduce greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions from soils16,18. These BEBCS co-beneﬁts
potentially offset some of the cost of its CDR, and simultaneously
address issues of food security for a growing world population19.
BC can also increase or decrease the turnover rate of native soil
organic carbon (SOC)20–23, which would create a negative or
positive feedback, respectively, on the amount of carbon
sequestered. BEBCS also has additional costs associated with
haulage, handling and tillage of BC.
Under which, if any, set of biophysical and economic
conditions BEBCS becomes more attractive relative to both BES
and BECCS has not been previously investigated. We address this
issue here by developing a multi-parameter model to determine
which of BES, BECCS, or BEBCS is the more economically
efﬁcient use of a given biomass resource for climate-change
mitigation under varying conditions. A multivariate Monte Carlo
analysis was conducted using a broad range of parameter related
to agro-ecological, economic, technological, global spatial and
temporal variability and uncertainty to 2100. Here we show that,
despite BECCS offering twice the carbon sequestration and
bioenergy per unit biomass, BEBCS may allow earlier deployment
of CDR at lower carbon prices. Our model predicts that, at carbon
prices above $1,000 Mg  1 C, BECCS is typically the most
economic biomass technology for climate-change mitigation.
At carbon prices below $1,000 Mg  1 C, BEBCS is the most
cost-effective technology only where BC signiﬁcantly improves
agricultural yields, with pure BES being otherwise preferred.
2

Thus, we have shown that BEBCS can be competitive with both
BES and BECCS under a range of conditions.
Results
Impact of carbon price on optimal technology. Biomass supply
chains are highly heterogeneous, with costs and emissions varying
geospatially and temporally with species, production conditions,
and harvest, collection and storage practices. To facilitate
comparison of biomass conversion technologies across this
diverse landscape of feedstock supply chains, the analysis was
based on a functional unit of mass of biomass delivered to the
conversion facility gate, assuming that all costs and emissions
associated with delivering that biomass are independent of
the conversion technology used to process it. For each of the
conversion technologies (BES, BECCS or BEBCS), we deﬁne its
relative net present value (RPV) as the difference between its net
present value (NPV) and the NPV of the best alternative.
By making comparisons on the basis of RPV per unit biomass, all
costs, beneﬁts and emissions associated with biomass supply
cancel out. For a given biomass supply chain, we thus calculate
which of the technologies is most economically efﬁcient relative
to the alternatives under given conditions, with the caveat
that this approach does not determine when biomass price or
environmental externalities would make none of the bioenergy
conversion processes viable. A full description of the calculation
of RPV is provided in Methods.
At carbon prices below $460 Mg  1 C, BES has the highest
mean NPV (range where BES mean RPV40 in Fig. 1a).
For carbon prices in the range of $460–$900 Mg  1 C, BEBCS
has the highest mean NPV. Above $900 Mg  1 C, BECCS has the
highest mean NPV (Fig. 1a).
Although these three technologies can be broadly categorized
by which is optimal at different carbon prices, variability (and, to
a lesser extent, uncertainty) in their RPVs contributes
to considerable overlap in the ranges of suitability of the three
technologies (see overlapping uncertainty ranges shown by the
shaded areas at þ /  1 s.d. (s) in Fig. 1a). In the lower
carbon-price range below $400 Mg  1 C, BES is most likely
(P ¼ 0.44–0.64) to have the highest NPV, while BEBCS has the
highest NPV for most other situations (P ¼ 0.37–0.44), BECCS
being infrequently (Po0.1) the most economic biomass power
generation technology in this carbon-price range (Fig. 1b).
Although BECCS is typically the technology with highest NPV
in the higher carbon-price range (4$1,000 Mg  1 C), even with
carbon prices as high as $3,000 Mg  1 C BEBCs remains the most
economic technology in 20% of the parameter space (Fig. 1b).
Two mitigation scenarios were investigated: MS430–480, in
which atmospheric CO2 concentration in 2100 is in the range
430–480 p.p.m. (IPCC Representative Concentration Pathway
RCP2.6), consistent with a likely (deﬁned as P40.66) probability
of temperature change below 2 °C relative to pre-industrial levels;
and MS650–720, which relates to the upper band of IPCC
RCP4.5, in which temperature change below 2 °C is unlikely,
buto3 °C warming remains more likely than not3 (P40.5).
The carbon price ranges for each of the mitigation scenarios
(MS430–480 and MS650–720) in each of the years 2020, 2050
and 2100 are shown in Fig. 1c to facilitate cross referencing of the
carbon prices in Fig. 1a,b to the scenarios (see Supplementary
Fig. 1 for cumulative probability distributions of carbon prices in
each scenario, and Supplementary Table 1 for summary statistics
of these distributions).
Relative importance of parameters. The relative importance
of parameters in determining variability in RPV was assessed
by random forest analysis, a method that takes account of

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:13160 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

ARTICLE

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160

600

b

a

BES

1.00

BECCS

300

0.75

0

0.50

−300

0.25

−600

Probability

RPV ($ Mg−1 biomass)

BEBCS

0.00
0

1,000

2,000

3,000

0

1,000

Carbon price ($ Mg−1 C)
MS430−480 (2100)
MS430−480 (2050)
MS430−480 (2020)
MS650−720 (2100)
MS650−720 (2050)
MS650−720 (2020)

2,000

3,000

Carbon price ($ Mg−1 C)

c

50

100

200

500

1,000 2,000

5,000 10,000 20,000

Carbon price ($ Mg−1 C)

Figure 1 | Relative present value as a function of carbon price. (a) Shows the relative present value (RPV) and (b) shows the probability of having the
highest RPV, as a function of carbon price, for bioenergy systems (BES; cyan line), bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS; orange line) and
bioenergy-biochar systems (BEBCS; purple line). Shading indicates one s.d.. (c) Shows the carbon price distribution for each of the mitigation scenarios
(MS430–480 and MS650–720) in each of the years 2020, 2050 and 2100 (boxes indicate the median, upper and lower quartiles and whiskers extend to
1.5 times the interquartile range).

parameter covariances24. Parameter importance was estimated by
incremental mean square error (IMSE) of the random forest
model with respect to each parameter (Fig. 2).
The highest ranked parameters, in order of their importance as
determinants of BEBCS RPV are electricity price, BC’s long-term
impact on crop yields, carbon price and discount rate. Electricity
price and BC’s crop-yield impact are of approximately equal
importance because the value of BC to crop production must
offset the foregone energy production involved in its manufacture
for BEBCS to be preferred. Note that it is the long-term impact of
BC on alleviating soil constraints to crop yields that is critical to
its economic value. BC is most likely to have a long-term positive
impact on crop production in soils with low cation exchange
capacity (CEC) (Methods: crop yield impacts of BC). While BC
can also improve crop yields through ephemeral mechanisms
such as fertilization (when BC contains plant-available nutrients)
or raising the pH of acidic soils, these mechanisms have lower
economic value, because their impact diminishes rapidly over
time (Methods: value of BC’s liming potential to address soil pH
constraints’’, and ‘‘value of BC’s nutrient content). The next most
important determinant of BEBCS RPV was the persistence or
stability of BC in soil (Methods: BC decomposition, and
Supplementary Fig. 2).
The ranking order of most important parameters differed
slightly for BES and BECCS, in which cases carbon price ranked
highest. Carbon price is more important for BES and BECCS,
because it is the primary factor in determining which of these two
is more cost effective, with low (high) carbon prices favouring
BES (BECCS), with other factors altering the balance between
them in the intermediate price range. BEBCS, on the other hand,
is slightly less sensitive to carbon price than BES or BECCS,
because it has an additional major value stream—its crop yield
impact—that is independent of carbon pricing. Discount rate
ranks highly because of its differential impact on the various
technologies, with BC continuing to accrue beneﬁts
gradually over time after it has been produced (due to its impacts

BEBCS

BECCS

BES

Electricity price
BC crop−yield impact
Carbon price
Discount rate
BC persistence
Crop price increase
BES generation efficiency
CO2 capture and storage cost
BC impact on SOC turnover
BECCS %CO2 sequestered
0

100 200 300 400 500
Parameter importance
(%IMSE)

Figure 2 | Parameter importance as determinants of relative present
value. The most important parameters for determining the relative present
value (RPV) of bioenergy systems (BES; open cyan triangles), bioenergy
with carbon capture and storage (BECCS; open orange squares) and
bioenergy-biochar systems (BEBCS; ﬁlled purple circles). Parameters are
ranked in order of importance in determining BEBCS RPV. Parameter
importance was determined by random forest analysis incremental mean
square error (IMSE). BC, biochar; CCS, carbon capture and storage; SOC,
soil organic carbon; and BECCS seq. fraction is the fraction of generated
CO2 that is sequestered.

on soil fertility and soil GHG emissions), whereas the revenue
streams from BES and BECCS (energy production and carbon
sequestration) are valued at time of production.
Plotting the RPVs and the highest-ranked parameters on a
parallel coordinates plot (Fig. 3) provides a useful visual
indication of the typical conditions in which the RPV of each
technology is maximized. Each line on the parallel coordinates

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:13160 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

3

Max

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160

BES

BEBCS

BECCS

Min

Parameter value
(normalized to parameter range)

ARTICLE

V ice ice act ate nce ase
V
V
st
RP RP RP n pr y pr mp nt r iste cre S co
i
t
S
S
u
i
o
s
in
CC
B EBC ECC arb ctric ield isco per ice
y D
C
e
B
C
B
pr
El op−
B
op
cr
Cr
BC
ES

Figure 3 | Parallel coordinates plot of the relative net present values as a
function of the most important parameters. Relative net present values
(RPVs) of bioenergy systems (BES), bioenergy with carbon capture and
storage (BECCS) and bioenergy-biochar systems (BEBCS), and the principal
factors on which these RPVs depend, in the years 2020, 2050 and 2100,
are shown here with each of the seven most important parameters (see
Fig. 2) plotted on parallel axes, to allow depiction of a multidimensional
parameter space in a two-dimensional image. Each line represents a single
data point in the Monte Carlo simulation, connecting the values of each
variable for that point. The number of Monte Carlo simulations plotted was
limited to 4,500 (750 randomly sampled from each of the six scenario-year
combinations) to prevent over-cluttering the plot and to ensure high
visibility of the main trends. Parameter values are normalized linearly within
their sample ranges so that the y axes of all parameters share a common
scale that is linearly interpolated between the parameter minimum and
maximum. Line transparency is graduated by RPV (darker, less transparent
lines for higher RPV), also to increase visibility of the main trends. Lines are
coloured by which technology is optimal under the speciﬁed conditions
(cyan, BES, purple, BEBCS and orange, BECCS).

plot corresponds to a single point in the multi-dimensional
parameter space, with lines connecting the values for each
parameter on their respective (parallel) axes. Each parallel
parameter axis is normalized to range from the minimum to
the maximum value of that parameter. For example, it can be seen
that a high RPV for BECCS (Fig. 3, orange lines) correlates with
high carbon and electricity prices (evident in the clustering of
orange lines at the upper end on these parameter axes), whereas
the opposite conditions favour BEBCS. When interpreting such
plots, however, care must be taken to consider covariance
between parameters, which can give rise to correlations that are
not causal. For example, it can be seen in Fig. 3 that large
increases in crop price correlate with a high RPV for BECCS,
despite the fact that high crop prices would favour BEBCS
rather than BECCS if all else remained equal. But, the time factor
in the model means that crop prices rise over time (Methods:
future food price trends), while other factors that improve
the competitiveness of BECCS also increase with time and thus
co-vary with crop prices without any causal link.
Impacts of mitigation scenario and time on technology mix. A
more detailed approach to quantifying and visualizing the
impacts and interactions of parameters was investigated using the
distributions of parameter values for which BES, BEBCS or
BECCS becomes the preferred technology, disaggregated by
mitigation scenario and time (Fig. 4). Figure 4 indicates for each
scenario (level of mitigation and year) how far each parameter
must differ from the mean of that parameter in order to
make each technology option the optimal one. In the following
4

discussion, the bias, d, of parameter P is deﬁned as
d ¼ [m(P,T)  m(P)]/s(P), where m(P) and s(P) are the mean and
s.d., respectively, of parameter P, and m(P,T) is the mean when
technology TA{BES, BEBCS, BECCS} has the highest RPV.
That is, d provides a measure (in dimensionless units of s.d.’s) of
how far, on average, values of P must deviate from the mean for a
given technology to be most economic. A high value of d indicates
that a parameter exerts a strong effect on whether a technology
will be the preferred option, with positive (negative) values of d
indicating that the parameter must be higher (lower) than average
to make that technology optimal. Absolute values of the ranges,
means and s.d.’s of each parameter in each scenario are given in
Supplementary Tables 2–4.
In 2020–2050, BES is the preferred technology option when its
RPV is, on average, 0.8–1.2 s.d.’s higher than its mean value
(that is, d ¼ 0.8–1.2). For BES to achieve this higher than average
RPV requires conditions that favour BES relative to BEBCS
(the primary competing technology at the carbon prices
prevailing in 2020–2050 even under the more stringent mitigation
scenario MS430–480). The main factors that favour BES over
BEBCS are: a lower than average BC yield impact (d ¼  0.7
to  1.0 s), higher than average energy prices ( þ 0.4 to þ 0.5 s),
and low discount rates (  0.3 s). By 2050 in MS430–480, lower
than average carbon prices (  0.4 s) (as carbon prices start to
move into a range where BECCS is optimal under favourable
conditions) and above average carbon intensity of the electricity
generation sector ( þ 0.4 s) also begin to have a stronger role in
determining if BES will be the preferred technology.
By 2100, BES is not competitive in MS430–480 under any
conditions (note the absence of bars for BES in this scenario in
2100 in Fig. 4a). In MS650–720, on the other hand, BES
maintains its competitiveness in 2100 only when a combination
of factors are all seen, including a high carbon intensity ( þ 1.6 s),
low carbon prices (  1.5 s), high cost of carbon capture and
storage ( þ 1.6 s), and a low fraction of CO2 being sequestered by
BECCS (  1.0 s).
In 2020–2050, BEBCS is optimal under roughly the opposite
conditions that favour BES (BES and BEBCS being the main
competing technologies at these times). In essence, this means
that BEBCS is most likely to be favoured when the BC yield
impact is higher than average ( þ 0.4 to þ 0.6 s), energy prices
are below average (  0.2 to  0.4 s), and discount rates are
slightly below average (  0.2 s). By 2100 in MS650–720, more
stringent conditions are required to keep BEBCS optimal, with a
higher yield impact ( þ 0.9 s), lower discount rate (  0.7 s), and
lower electricity prices (  0.6 s) being required. Whereas, in
MS430–480, BEBCS remains competitive by 2100 with BECCS
only under particularly favourable conditions that give BEBCS
an RPV þ 2.0 s higher than average. These conditions depend on
a combination of a very low discount rate (  1.2 s), a carbon
price that is in the lower range for that time (  0.7 s), and
locations with soils that show a high BC yield impact ( þ 1.1 s),
which is most likely to occur on cropland soils with low CEC
(Methods: crop yields impact of BC).
BECCS is not competitive in 2020 in MS650–720 under any
conditions (hence, the bars for BECCS are absent for these years
in Fig. 4f). In 2020, BECCS is only competitive in MS430–480
under highly favourable conditions that require a very low cost
for carbon dioxide capture and sequestration (CCS) (  1.6 s),
low BC yield impact (  1.0 s), and high carbon prices ( þ 0.7 s).
For BECCS to be competitive in 2050 in the more ambitious
mitigation scenario MS430–480 requires that a combination of
factors improve its performance relative to both BES and BEBCS
simultaneously, both of which are also viable technologies under a
wide range of conditions at that time. This requires some
combination of low BC yield impact (  0.6 s), high carbon price

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:13160 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

ARTICLE

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160

MS430−480

MS650−720
2020

2

2050

a

d

b

e

c

f

2100

BES

1
0
−1
−2

1
BEBCS

Standardized value (s.d.)

2

0
−1
−2
2

BECCS

1
0
−1
−2
V V V act ate ice ce ity ice cy ost ost ost ed lty
V V V ct ate rice ce ity ice cy st ost st ed lty
RP RP RP pa t r p ten ns pr ien co c co er na RP RP RP p t r pr ten ns pr ien c c c er na
S CS CS ld im oun icity rsis inte bon effic pital pital age uesty pe ES CS CS ld im oun icity rsis inte bon effic pital pital rage uesty pe
E
r
c
r
r
B EC EB yie isc ctr pe on ar n ca ca sto eq nc
B EC EB yie is ct pe on a n ca ca to eq nc
B B p− D Ele BC arb C atio ES BS nd 2 s ficie
B B p− D Ele BC arb C ratio ES BS d s 2 s ficie
r B E a
n
c
c
o
f
f
O
E
r
B
e
r
cro
c
B re
B re a %C S e
ne
CO e
tor
en
cto
ge
g
u
C
tu S %CCS
e
ec
t
BC
BC
S
s
s
p
C
p
S
S
a
C
r
r
a
C
E
E
BE
BE
we
we
2 c EC B
2 c EC B
Po
Po
CO B
CO B

Figure 4 | Parameter ranges for which each technology has the highest relative net present value. The y axes are in units of standardized values for each
parameter—that is, population mean of that parameter (in each scenario) is at zero, and height is measured in s.d.’s from the mean. (a–c) Relate to
mitigation scenario MS430–480 (that is, atmospheric CO2 concentration in 2100 is 430–480 p.p.m. (IPCC Representative Concentration Pathway
RCP2.6), consistent with a likely chance to keep temperature change below 2 °C relative to pre-industrial levels), and d–f relate to MS650–720 (RCP 4.5, in
which temperature change below 3 °C is more unlikely than likely). Each panel is divided in two with three response variables (relative present values of
BES, BEBCS or BECCS) on the left of the solid line, and the 12 most important independent parameters on the right. Each parameter has three bars (blue,
pink and yellow) for parameter ranges in the years 2020, 2050 and 2100, respectively. Bars show the mean þ /  1 s.d. of the samples in which BES
(a,d), BEBCS (b,e) or BECCS (c,f) has the highest RPV. Thus, the graph shows for each scenario (level of mitigation and year) how far each parameter must
differ from the mean of that parameter in order to make each technology option the preferred one. Note that absent bars for BECCS in 2020 (f) and BES in
2100 (a) indicate that they are not economically viable at those times.

( þ 0.3 s), low CCS cost (  0.8 s) and high discount rate
( þ 0.3 s). By 2100 in MS430–480, BECCS is favoured
under most conditions, therefore, no signiﬁcant bias is observed
in any of the parameters to make BECCS competitive. The
same is broadly true in MS650–720, except that BEBCS can
remain competitive in 2100 when its yield impact is high
( þ 0.9 s), the discount rate is low (  0.7 s), and electricity prices
are low (  0.6 s).
Discussion
Our results show that the availability and inclusion of BEBCS
within a portfolio of climate-mitigation measures can reduce the
costs and ease the implementation of long-term CDR strategies
using biomass, because BEBCS can be signiﬁcantly cheaper than

BECCS when agronomic beneﬁts offset costs. The reduced cost of
CDR using BEBCS, relative to an energy supply portfolio in
which BECCS is the only negative emissions technology,
may allow for earlier CDR deployment at a lower carbon price
than in scenarios without BEBCS.
However, long-term improvements in soil productivity from
BC applications are required for BEBCS to become competitive
with either BES or BECCS. This suggests that an integrated
portfolio of BECCS plus BEBCS would maximize the economic
potential for CDR, with BEBCS being preferred where long-term
fertility of agricultural soils can beneﬁt most from BC. However,
it is important to note that long-term crop trials with BC
remain largely absent from the published literature. Of the 781
treatments from 68 published studies used to develop the crop
response relationship for our model, 85% were measured in the

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:13160 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

5

ARTICLE

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160

ﬁrst year following BC addition, 10% in the second year, 3% in
the third year, 2% in the fourth year and no data were
available from longer term trials in the peer-reviewed literature
(Methods: Crop yield impacts of BC, Supplementary Figs 3–5,
and Supplementary Tables 5 and 6). Although a correlation
between higher crop response and low soil CEC was found,
suggesting that BC can offer long term improvement to the
fertility of low CEC soils (Methods: Crop yield impacts of BC),
the evidence to support this hypothesis from direct observation
remains inadequate. Furthermore, in some studies, unfavourable
changes in soil chemical, physical and biological properties and
reductions in crop yields have been reported25. An improved
understanding of the mechanisms underlying crop response to
BC will support the development of decision-support models that
direct BC applications into systems they can most beneﬁt, and
that avoid the application of unsuitable grades of BC in cropping
systems where they may do harm, while distinguishing between
uncertainty and manageable variability26. Nonetheless, we note
that there is currently low conﬁdence and high uncertainty in the
expected long-term response of speciﬁc soil-crop systems to BC
amendments. While the parameter ranges used in our model
reﬂect this high level of uncertainty, it is clear that further
research to provide long term data on crop response in a variety
of soils, cropping systems and agroecological zones should be a
pre-requisite to the widespread use of BC. Further research will
also be required to quantify impacts on ecosystem services and
functions such as interactions with soil-dwelling and aquatic
biota, nutrient cycling through ecosystems and the potential
for contamination or bioaccumulation of contaminants27.
Where or when BEBCS is not viable, BES (BECCS) is more
often than not (that is, P40.5) the preferred option at carbon
prices below (above) $660 Mg  1 C. The dependence of BEBCS
on beneﬁcial soil-fertility impacts to be economically viable
means that its economic potential for climate-change mitigation
is likely lower than its sustainable technical potential previously
reported7. BEBCS may, however, increase the total technical
potential for CDR, not just because it allows for earlier
deployment, but also because it may be applicable in situations
where BECCS is not: for example, in locations too remote from
suitable geologic or other sinks for BECCS to be economic, or in
the production of carbon-negative transport biofuels—a sector
not readily compatible with CO2 capture and storage. The
results reported here indicate that BEBCS could be a key
component to reduce the costs and otherwise ease the
implementation of long-term climate-mitigation strategies.
At present, integrated assessment models (IAMs) are the
primary tool for assessing questions such as these associated with
long-term stabilization scenarios. While recognizing that it is
premature to embark on a large scale deployment of BEBCS for
climate-change mitigation, given the remaining uncertainties
outlined above, we recommend that a useful next phase of
research would be inclusion of BEBCS as a technology option in
IAMs. Large uncertainties are routinely investigated in IAMs by
the use of scenarios as a means to provide what-if analyses. For
example, the current uncertainty over the viability of CCS as a
mitigation technology option, has been investigated in IAM
simulations through the use of scenarios in which CCS either is or
is not included as an option (see, for example, ﬁg. 6.35 in ref. 4).
Including scenarios, both with and without BEBCS, in IAM
simulations would allow for a more thorough understanding of
how availability of BEBCS as a mitigation option would affect the
cost, timing and technology mix of a comprehensive mitigation
strategy, if increased crop yields persist in the long term. This
improved understanding will be critical to making informed
decisions about how great an investment in further BC research is
justiﬁed. For example, we have shown that, with carbon prices
6

expected to rise over time, BEBCS could lead to earlier
adoption of CDR. However, the converse is also possible, that
BEBCS might delay adoption of BECCS until carbon prices rise
sufﬁciently high for BECCS to become competitive with BEBCS.
The overall impact of such interactions on overall mitigation
outcomes and costs can only be assessed adequately by using
IAMs.
A ﬁnal issue is the question of the costs and impacts of biomass
supply chains to support any of these technologies at a sufﬁcient
scale to make a substantial contribution to climate change
mitigation. The land area required to provide sufﬁcient BECCS to
meet the requirements of MS430–480 has been estimated at
400–700 Mha (two to four times the global area of abandoned
or marginal land)28. These large demands on land would be
expected to create competition for productive land with food,
ﬁbre, biofuels, habitat and other ecosystem services29,30.
Nutrient28,31 and water32 supply may also further constrain
biomass supply potential. The results presented here are
independent of the actual costs (economic, social and
environmental) and prices of biomass supply, because we
calculate only the relative value of each technology (that is, how
much better or worse it is than the alternative technologies
considered). In practice, these costs and the price of biomass will
be key determinants of the feasibility of any mitigation strategy
that places demands on biomass supply. At present, there is low
agreement in the literature as to the scale of the biomass potential
once economic, social and environmental impacts are considered.
Improved estimates using a systems approach that considers all
these aspects in a spatially explicit manner must be a high
research priority to ensure that policy decisions with possibly
irreversible global implications are not based on unrealistic
estimates of the biomass supply potential.
Methods
Overall approach. A discounted cost-beneﬁt analysis approach was used to
compare BES, BECCS and BEBCS, with global environmental beneﬁts of avoided
carbon dioxide emissions internalized into the econometric model as a carbon
price. NPV is deﬁned as the sum of all time-discounted costs and beneﬁts of a
project (equation (1))
NPV ¼

N
X

Rt

t¼0 ð1 þ iÞ

t;

ð1Þ

where, t ¼ time interval, N is the total number of time intervals over the period of
analysis, Rt is the net cash ﬂow (total beneﬁts minus total costs) at time t, and i is
the discount rate.
Comparative evaluation of the three biomass conversion technologies (BES,
BECCS and BEBCS) was conducted by calculating how much higher or lower each
technology’s NPV is than the next best alternative—a metric we refer to as its RPV,
deﬁned by equation (1):
RPV ¼ NPV  OC;

ð2Þ

where OC is the NPV of the best alternative foregone. To calculate RPV for each
technology, we note that by deﬁning NPV’ as the NPV excluding costs and beneﬁts
associated with the biomass supply chain (NPVbm), the problem becomes more
tractable by cancelling NPVbm from the calculation (equations (3 and 4)):
NPV0 ¼ NPV  NPVbm

ð3Þ

RPV ¼ NPV  OC ¼ NPV0  OC0

ð4Þ

Therefore,
Hence, by making comparisons on the basis of a functional unit of mass of biomass
delivered to the conversion facility gate, all costs, beneﬁts and emissions associated
with the biomass supply side of the equation cancel out and we are able to
calculate, for a given biomass supply chain, which of the conversion technologies
considered is most economically efﬁcient.
The NPV calculation of the various conversion technologies consisted of the
following components. First, all technologies have capital, operation and
maintenance costs; revenue from energy production; and avoided CO2 emissions
from reference energy system that would have provided energy supply if bioenergy
were not generated. Second, BECCS and BEBCS have an additional beneﬁt from
reduced atmospheric CO2 due to their carbon sequestration component
(that is, they return a smaller fraction of the biomass carbon to the atmosphere
than do BES), but with lower energy conversion efﬁciencies than BES. Third,

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:13160 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

ARTICLE

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160

BEBCS can have further beneﬁts from its potential to increase agricultural
productivity on low-fertility soils, to reduce N2O emissions from soils, and to offset
agricultural lime and fertilizer inputs. BEBCS has additional costs and emissions
associated with transport of BC and ﬁeld operations to spread and incorporate
the BC. BC can also alter (increase or decrease) the turnover rate of native
(non-pyrogenic) SOC, which can either be a cost or a beneﬁt, depending on the
direction of the effect.
Thus,
0
Nbes
¼ Ne þ Naff  Ncc  Nom

ð5Þ

0
Nbeccs
¼ Ne þ Naff þ Ncs  Ncc  Nom

ð6Þ

0
Nbebcs
¼ Ne þ Naff þ Ncs þ Nbcf þ Nbcg  Ncc  Nom  Nbct

ð7Þ

Where,
Ne ¼ NPV of net energy generated,
Naff ¼ NPV of avoided fossil fuel emissions,
Ncc ¼ NPV of capital costs,
Nom ¼ NPV of operation and maintenance,
Ncs ¼ NPV of carbon sequestration,
Nbcf ¼ NPV of BC impacts on soil fertility and crop production
Nbcg ¼ NPV of BC impacts on soil GHG ﬂuxes
Nbct ¼ NPV of BC transport and tillage operations
A Monte Carlo analysis was conducted (n ¼ 30,000 per scenario) to investigate
the performance of each technology over a broad range of parameter values
representative of uncertainty and variability globally to 2100. Ranges, means and
s.d.’s of each parameter in each scenario are given in Supplementary Tables 2–4.
Derivation of these parameter ranges and methods and equations used to model
their impacts are detailed in the following sections.
Carbon price. We apply a price on carbon to internalize impacts on net GHG
ﬂuxes into the economic comparison of biomass energy technologies. It was
assumed that the same carbon price would apply to all technologies equally. The
ranges of estimated carbon price within all idealized implementation scenarios that
reported carbon prices in the IPCC WG III AR5 Scenario Database (Annex II.10)
(ref. 33) are shown in Supplementary Table 1, categorized by year and by maximum atmospheric CO2 eq. concentration in 2100. The quantiles in Supplementary
Table 1 for a given year and concentration pathway were ﬁtted to lognormal
distributions for multivariate sensitivity analysis; cumulative probability curves of
these ﬁtted functions are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1. Non-CO2 GHGs were
converted to CO2 equivalents using 100-year global warming potentials34. Thus,
each IPCC emission pathway was represented in the scenarios by the
corresponding carbon price range (Supplementary Tables 1, 3 and 4). According to
standard practice in integrated assessment modelling, the carbon price was applied
both to net avoided emissions (for example, avoided fossil fuel consumption
displaced by bioenergy) and also to carbon offsets in the form of net sequestered
carbon in BECCS and BEBCS.
Discount rate. There has been much debate in the recent literature about the
appropriate discount rate to apply for issues with long-term and intergenerational
impacts such as climate change. Discounting of future costs and beneﬁts is done for
two principal reasons. First, if the overall economy grows, as is assumed in many
(but not all) forecasts, the utility of a given sum of money diminishes according to
the law of diminishing marginal utility. Second, and more contentiously, future
costs and beneﬁts are often discounted simply because they occur further in the
future. This second component of discounting is referred to as the pure time
discount rate (PTDR) and is a common feature of most markets. The Stern
review35 challenged the prevailing application of a PTDR, arguing that it is
indefensible with regard to inter-generational ethics. For example, Stern et al.
(page 31 of ref. 35) state, ‘we take a simple approach in this review: if a future
generation will be present, we suppose that it has the same claim on our ethical
attention as the current one’. This stance has been challenged by others who argue
that applying a PTDR is more consistent with observed market behaviour36, and
with increasing uncertainty associated with forecasting the distant future37. We do
not take a speciﬁc stance here on the correct social discount rate to apply, but use a
sensitivity range in the Monte Carlo analysis that covers the range of values
normally applied as social discount rates, from the lower value of 1.5% per year
suggested by Stern et al.35, to the upper bound of 6% suggested by both Nordhaus36
and Weitzman37.
It should be noted that BES is, in comparison to BECCS and BEBCS a more
mature technology. Therefore, it is currently considered to be less risky to invest in
this technology. Risk is sometimes reﬂected in discount rates, with higher (riskadjusted) discount rates being applied to higher risk technologies. In this analysis
we account for risk, not by applying differential discount rates to each technology,
but by using a Monte Carlo method to simulate uncertainty in a technology
performing worse (or better) than expected. Expected cash ﬂows are thus adjusted
in line with the probability distributions of expected returns. We have thus used the
conventional practice of applying a common social discount rate to quantify the
uncertainty in the net social costs and beneﬁts for each technology on a common

basis. It should be borne in mind, however, that risk-averse investors may, in
practice, discount less proven technologies at a higher rate.
Capital depreciation. Capital expenditures were depreciated at the discount rate
(i) over a plant lifetime (L) within the sensitivity range of 25–45 years. Annualized
cost of capital was thus calculated by equations (8 and 9) below.
fa ¼

1  ð1  iÞ  L
i

ð8Þ

Ca ¼ fa C

ð9Þ

Where, C is the total capital cost, Ca is the annualized capital cost and fa is the
annuity factor.
Leakage and macroeconomic effects. Here we deﬁne leakage in the sense deﬁned
by the IPCC as a change in GHG emissions occurring outside of the project
boundary resulting from project activities. This study investigates the marginal
NPV of adding a unit of biomass power generation in the form of BES, BECCS or
BEBCS. As such, it assumes that the overall economic system is not signiﬁcantly
perturbed by the marginal change. Therefore, leakage arising from broader
economic effects due to changes in energy, carbon, food, land or other prices as a
result of adding bioenergy capacity were beyond the scope of this study.
Reference energy system. It was assumed that electricity provided by the BES
(BES, BEBCS or BECCS) would otherwise have been provided by a reference
energy system with carbon intensity CIref. In practice CIref depends what type of
power generation technology would have supplied the energy in the absence of the
bioenergy production. Depending on the legislative and economic framework
within which the BES is implemented, there can be several different types of drivers
of this interaction. Factors that can inﬂuence the carbon intensity of offset energy
include ﬁnancial and legislative instruments that may be designed to ensure that
new bioenergy capacity allows phase out of the most polluting alternative power
sources. Also, competition for available mitigation incentives can lead to bioenergy
capacity offsetting other low-carbon alternatives that would otherwise have
received available ﬁnance. Additionally, market forces or planning objectives may
lead to a mixed effect in which bioenergy offsets a mix of technologies whose
combined carbon intensity could be the overall energy mix of the existing system,
the energy mix of a subset of the existing energy infrastructure (for example, base
load or load-following power generation), or the energy mix of new plant that
would otherwise have replaced existing capacity as it reaches end-of-life.
To account for all these possibilities, we use a wide sensitivity range for CIref in
all scenarios that includes both high- and low-carbon technologies (Supplementary
Table 7) as a Gaussian distribution with mean and s.d. as given in Supplementary
Table 8. In 2010, the global carbon intensity of electricity generation was 0.04 Mg C
GJe 1(where GJe is a GJ of electrical energy generated (page 741, ﬁg.7.7 in ref. 38).
Avoided carbon emissions from the reference energy system (AEref) were then
calculated as electricity produced by BES (Ebes) multiplied by carbon intensity of
the reference energy system (CIref) (equation (9)):
AEref ¼ CIref Ebes

ð10Þ

Electricity price. Mean electricity price over 2010 to 2013 in IEA countries was
US$ 32.78 þ /  9.67 GJ  1 (1 s.d.) (equivalent to 11.8 þ /  3.5 c kWh  1),
industrial price before tax39. The lowest price was 14.59 USD GJ  1 (Norway), and
the highest was 56.32 USD GJ  1 (Italy). However, power generation in Norway is
currently over 90% hydro-electricity and may, therefore, be unrepresentative of
prices for biomass energy. The next lowest price was in the USA, at 17.88
USD GJ  1, which was therefore used as the lower bound of the range.
In all, 2014 electricity prices were, accordingly, assumed to lay in the range
14.6–56.3 USD GJ  1. Electricity prices to 2100 were estimated to rise linearly at
1.9–2.1 % of 2014 values per year40.
Bioenergy systems. Capital costs, generation efﬁciencies and operation and
maintenance costs for biomass power generation are shown in Supplementary
Table 9, for both recent (2012) plant, and for projections to 2030. It was assumed
that there would be no signiﬁcant further cost reductions or efﬁciency
improvements beyond the 2030 values. Values in 2020 were estimated by linear
interpolation. To provide comparability with BECCS, which is typically only
considered plausible at the large scale, the parameter ranges for 450 MW plant
were used in the Monte Carlo sensitivity analysis.
Bioenergy with carbon capture and storage. The baseline capital, operation and
maintenance costs of the biomass energy component of BECCS were assumed to be
the same as for BES, but with additional costs associated with CCS as described in
the following section.

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:13160 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

7

ARTICLE

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160

Cost of carbon capture and storage. Early IPCC estimates of the capital cost for
CCS applied to coal power stations were in the range $12–52 Mg  1 CO2
captured (2007 basis, with lower costs being associated with integrated gasiﬁcationcombined cycle, and higher costs with pulverized coal plants)15,41. Later estimates
based on greater experience and closer examination estimate tended towards higher
CO2 capture costs in the range of $48–80 Mg  1 CO2 captured ($67–109 Mg  1
CO2 avoided)42–45. The most recent and detailed estimates, which we use for this
study, expand this range somewhat to between $28–111 Mg  1 CO2 captured for
CCS applied to fossil fuel power plants46. These estimates, however, assume a
capacity factor of up to 0.85 which is high over the lifetime of a plant when
compared with recent experience of base-load coal power stations which on
average have achieved levelled capacity factors of 0.65–0.75 in the USA47. Here we
assume a capacity factor in the range 0.65–0.85, potentially increasing ﬁxed capital
costs by up to 24% relative to estimates based on a capacity factor of 0.85. We apply
the same capacity factor for BECCS, BEBCS and BES to prevent bias.
Costs of transporting CO2 were estimated to range from $1.3 to 14.8 Mg  1 CO2
per 250 km and geological storage costs (including monitoring) to range from
$0.6–8.3 Mg  1 CO2 (ref. 41). The pipeline diameter required for CO2 transport
increases more slowly with ﬂow rate (approximately with the square root of ﬂow
rate) than does cost per unit length (approximately proportional to diameter),
giving rise to substantial economies of scale48. Collection of CO2 from a network of
smaller biomass facilities co-located near to biomass resources would be likely to
also entail longer transport distances than fossil fuel CCS. Although lower
economies of scale and less efﬁcient source-sink matching for BECCS relative to
fossil CCS would potentially raise CO2 transport costs by up to $30 Mg  1 CO2
when CO2 must be transported further than 500 km (ref. 43), we assumed here that
BECCS would not be applied in situations where biomass resources were too
distant from suitable sinks to be viable14. CO2 transport distance was assumed to
range from 1 to 500 km.
CCS applied to biomass power, where speciﬁcally considered in the studies cited
above, has been assumed to have the same or comparable capital cost per kW of plant
generating capacity as coal-based systems43. Biomass conversion facilities are likely to
be smaller than fossil fuel power generation and would, therefore, tend to accrue
lower economies of scale, with accordingly higher CCS costs, on average, per unit C
captured than coal-based CCS43. We, therefore, extend the upper end of the range of
CCS costs considered here to include also BECCS deployment in suboptimal
conditions with lower economies of scale (up to 20% higher capital cost assumed),
lower capacity factors and longer CO2 transport distance than coal-CCS
(Supplementary Table 10). The costs shown in Supplementary Table 10 thus
represents a range from: (a) biomass co-ﬁring in large scale coal-powered power plant
situated close to geological sequestration reservoirs, at the low end, to (b) medium
scale dedicated BECCS (with 20% higher unit capital cost for CCS than a large scale
facility), with a capacity factor of 0.65, located up to 500 km from reservoirs.
Outlook for future CCS costs. Cost reductions of B15% have been estimated for
combustion-based plants with CCS and 20% for gasiﬁcation-based plants with CCS
after 100 GW of increased capacity worldwide relative to current technology46,49.
Accordingly, we have assumed cost reductions of 20% for CCS in 2100,
interpolated linearly for 2050 (Supplementary Tables 3 and 4).

production technology we consider here is slow pyrolysis. We assume
that fast pyrolysis would be the preferred technology over slow pyrolysis
only in those conditions when energy is more valuable than BC, in which
case the BC product of fast pyrolysis would itself be combusted rather than
added to soil.
Techno-economic assessments of pyrolysis for bioenergy have typically focused
more on fast pyrolysis (with its higher energy production potential) rather than
slow pyrolysis50–52. Accordingly, there are few detailed estimates of capital costs of
slow pyrolysis power generation plants in the published literature. To estimate a
realistic uncertainty range for slow pyrolysis power generation capital costs, we,
therefore, base the sensitivity range on costs for biomass integrated gasiﬁcation
combined cycle (BIGCC) power generation, for which a substantial literature exists.
In an analogous pyrolysis-based conﬁguration (PyGCC), the gasiﬁcation stage
would be replaced with a pyrolysis unit, a cyclone for char separation, and possibly
an additional gas conditioning plant to accommodate the higher tar content of
pyrolysis gases than gasiﬁer syngas. Due to the lower energy conversion efﬁciency
of slow pyrolysis than gasiﬁcation, the pyrolysis unit would need to be sized larger
per unit electricity generation than a BIGCC gasiﬁer (or conversely, for a given
biomass throughput, the electricity generation stage would be smaller in PyGCC
than BIGCC). This will also engender an increased size in biomass handling costs
per unit power output.
Gasiﬁcation accounts for B25–30% of BIGCC capital cost53. Biomass handling
and storage equipment accounts for a further 15–20% of BIGCC capital cost53,54.
We assume that biomass handling and gasiﬁcation costs are scaled from BIGCC to
PyGCC in proportion to the ratio of syngas fuel produced per unit biomass in a
gasiﬁer or pyrolyser (on an energy basis). Energy conversion efﬁciency is in the
range of 75–85% for gasiﬁcation55,56. For pyrolysis, energy conversion efﬁciency is
in the range 37–60% (see pyrolysis mass and energy balance, below), where higher
values correspond to pyrolysis at 600 °C with biomass being used as the fuel for
heat supply; and lower values correspond to pyrolysis at 450 °C, with syngas
providing the fuel for heat supply). To account for additional costs of BC handling
and tar cracking, we also add a further 25% of the pyrolyser cost to the overall
PyGCC system54. Thus, we estimate that capital cost of gasiﬁcation and biomass
handling for PyGCC is in the range of 20–60% higher than BIGCC per unit
electricity output capacity.
Operation and maintenance costs were assumed to be 3–5 % of capital costs, as
for BES (Supplementary Table 9).
Crop yield impacts of BC. BC can improve crop yields by a variety of
mechanisms, including (a) direct provision of nutrients, (b) alleviating pH
constraints, (c) improving fertilizer use efﬁciency (and thus nutrient uptake for a
given fertilizer application rate) by increasing the soil CEC and (d) improving soil
water holding capacity (WHC) (in light or sandy soils) or drainage (in clayey
soils)16,57,58. Of these mechanisms, nutrient content and liming potential of BC are
likely to be transient effects, whereas CEC and WHC impacts are associated with
the carbon matrix provided by BC and are likely to at least persist, if not increase,
while the BC remains. We, therefore, treat transient and persistent impacts of BC
separately in the valuation of its yield impacts.
Nf ;bc ¼ Nsoc;bc þ NpH;bc þ Nn;bc

BECCS efﬁciency penalty. Net generating efﬁciency, on a lower heating value
basis is assumed to be lower with than without CCS by an efﬁciency penalty (P) of
4–11 percentage points14,15,41,43 (equation (11)):
Ebeccs Ebes
¼
P
Elhv
Elhv

ð11Þ

Where, Ebeccs and Ebes are the net amounts of electricity exported from a BECCS
and BES plant, respectively; and Elhv is the energy content (on an lower heating
value basis) of the biomass used to generate that electricity.
BECCS CO2 sequestration fraction. We assume that between 81–91 % of CO2
generated from biomass combustion is sequestered41. Note that, per unit electricity
generated, CO2 captured is greater than CO2 avoided, because the efﬁciency
penalty (see BECCS efﬁciency penalty, above) means that more CO2 is emitted per
GJ electricity. Care must be taken when comparing literature values as to whether
they refer to CO2 captured or avoided. Here we base calculations on CO2 captured
per unit biomass combusted.
BEBCS costs. BC production necessarily entails a reduction in possible energy
production per unit biomass than a pure BES, because a substantial fraction of the
biomass enthalpy remains embodied in the BC product. Different pyrolysis
technologies have different relative yields of energy and BC; fast pyrolysis
producing more energy and less BC than slow pyrolysis. When energy is the
desired product, BC produced during pyrolysis will typically itself be combusted or
gasiﬁed to raise the energy production efﬁciency of the overall process. However,
under conditions when it is economically viable to produce BC at the expense of
energy (that is, when the value of the BC for soil improvement and carbon
sequestration is high enough to offset foregone energy when it is buried in soil),
it would then be most economical to maximize BC yields. Therefore, the BC
8

ð12Þ

Where,
Nsoc,bc is the NPV of BC’s long-term soil fertility beneﬁts from increased SOC,
NpH,bc is the NPV of BC’s liming potential and
Nn,bc is the NPV of BC’s nutrient content
To estimate the relative importance of these different types of mechanisms, we
conducted a random forest decision-tree analysis24 of a comprehensive database
crop trials with 781 treatments involving lignocellulosic feedstocks (excluding
manures) from 68 published studies (Supplementary Fig. 3). The analysis was
constrained to include only non-manure lignocellulosic feedstocks, because we are
interested here in feedstocks that may have a competitive use in bioenergy power
generation. Studies using hydrochar were also excluded because hydrochar turns
over rapidly (thus having little sequestration potential), and its production is not
currently compatible with power co-generation. Previous meta-analyses of
published yield responses have not employed methods that account for both
correlation (non-independence) and interactive effects of explanatory
parameters16,17. The random forest approach does not have these limitations, and
furthermore makes no implicit assumptions about the linearity or form of the
model. The stochastic ensemble approach of random forests also eliminates the
tendency of single decision tree models to overﬁt data24.
Of the BC yield-impact data shown in Supplementary Fig. 3, 85% were
measured in the ﬁrst year following BC addition, 10% in the second year, 3% in the
third year, 2% in the fourth year and no data were available from longer term trials.
Random forest analysis was conducted using the cForest function in the party
package of the R statistical programming language, which provides random forest,
bootstrapping and bagging ensemble algorithms utilizing conditional inference
trees. cForest was run with an ensemble of 5,001 trees (parameter value
ntree ¼ 5,001), 5 parameter tries per node (mtry ¼ 5), and the cforest_unbiased
method to eliminate bias towards predictors with continuous values or greater
number of categories. The resulting relative importance of the predictor variables

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:13160 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

ARTICLE

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160

(estimated by incremental change in mean square error from omitting a variable
from the model) is shown in Supplementary Fig. 4.
The relative importance of the model parameters was estimated by the IMSE for
each parameter in the random forest analysis24. Soil pH and CEC were
overwhelmingly, and approximately equally, the most important predictors of yield
response to BC (IMSE ¼ 0.085 and 0.084, respectively). Next, clay and silt content,
BC carbon fraction, and fertilizer and BC application rates were of secondary
importance (IMSE ¼ 0.02–0.04). Crop type, pyrolysis temperature, sand, SOC, BC
pH and feedstock were only minor predictors of yield response (IMSEo0.02).
Time since BC application was found to be a very poor indicator of yield response
within the available data, but this is likely to have been skewed by most of the
measurements being taken during the ﬁrst cropping cycle following application.
Value of increased soil carbon from BC additions. Because pH impacts of BC
are approximately equally responsible for observed yield responses as are CEC
effects (Supplementary Fig. 4), it is unlikely that the more extreme yield responses
observed would be solely attributable to increased SOC, rather than having also a
pH and possibly nutrient mechanism contributing. We, therefore, estimate that the
potential range of persistent yield impacts attributable to BC increasing SOC
(and the associated effects on CEC and WHC) lies within the 50% of the
yield-response data represented by the interquartile range (Supplementary Fig. 5).
Current food prices. Supplementary Table 5 shows the production, yield and
price of major food crops globally during the period 2008–2013, ranked by area
harvested (derived from FAOStat data59). The range of impacts of BC on yields of
major crops is shown in Supplementary Fig. 5. Note that major crops, such as sugar
cane, that have shown either no signiﬁcant yield improvements or only yield
reductions with BC are not included, because it was assumed that BC would not be
used for such crops. The economic values of these yield increments are then
calculated by multiplying by the crop price. The interquartile range of these values
for major crops with demonstrated yield responses to BC are shown in
Supplementary Table 6 (based on inter-annual and international producer price
ﬂuctuations over the period 2008–2013).
Thus, depending on crop, soil and location the estimated value of increased
crop yields (Rf,bc) resulting from BC-SOC varies between  $13 to $63 per
yr Mg  1 C (IQR), based on 2008–2013 crop prices. The NPV in perpetuity is then
calculated as the sum of these annual returns discounted at the discount rate and
diminishing exponentially in proportion to the decay rate of the BC
(equation (13)).
Nf ;bc ¼ 

Rf ;bc


i þ lnð2Þ
T1=2

ð13Þ

Future food price trends. Projections of future food price trends have advanced
considerably in recent years with an increasing diversity of trade models being
applied under a range of possible projected trends in yield, and prices disaggregated
by speciﬁc commodities, and under a range of future population and climate
scenarios60–65. Existing studies point to a high degree of uncertainty in future food
prices, and high sensitivity to assumptions about climate change, adaptation to
climate change, CO2 fertilization, potential for yield improvements, dietary shifts,
population, land degradation and competing land uses. Furthermore, there is a lack
of published projections beyond 2050, giving rise to even greater uncertainty in
trends through to 2100. Departing from the trend of falling food prices over the
20th century, current projections suggest that increasing population and afﬂuence
will drive an increase in food prices over the 21st century that will outstrip the
potential for increased agricultural intensiﬁcation to provide a counterbalance64,65.
General and partial equilibrium trade models suggest that food price increases
ranging from 3–84% are very likely by 2050 (refs 60–66). In the shorter term, we
assume that food prices will increase by 3–5% in real terms by 2020 relative to 2000
(0–3% relative to current prices)65. In the absence of published estimates through
to 2100, we make the simplifying assumption that world population increases from
2050 to 2100 by 14% (ref. 67), and would drive a proportional increase in food
prices over this time interval. Thus we assume food prices rise by 4–96% relative to
present values by 2100.
Value of BC liming potential. In addition to BC’s potential to provide long lasting
impacts on soil fertility through increased SOC, transient impacts of BC as a liming
agent and organic fertilizer also have value. The economic value of BC’s impact on
soil pH was estimated according to the method of ref. 14, whereby BC’s calcium
carbonate equivalence (CCEbc) is given by equation (14). The NPVcce of this liming
potential is then calculated as the avoided cost of an equivalent quantity of
agricultural lime, assuming a price of $10–80 Mg  1 CaCO3.
CCEbc ¼ 5:378 þ 1:582 Bbc  0:2136 Abc

ð14Þ

Where, Abc ¼ ash content of the BC, and Bbc ¼ the percentage of base elements
(Ca, Mg, K and Na) in the BC.
Phyllis 2 database68 gives mean ash content of straw, wood and bagasse as
5.5 þ /  5.3% (1 s.d.), and base elements make up 41 þ /  34% (1 s.d.) of the ash

elements by mass. To calculate ash content of the BC, it was assumed that ash was
conserved during pyrolysis. The low end of the sensitivity range for liming value
was set at zero, to represent situations in which the soil has no pH constraints, or
when combustion ash from a BES might be used to provide an equivalent liming
value. It was assumed that BC would not be used in situations that cause adverse
pH impacts (for example, adding high pH BC to already alkaline soils).
Value of BC nutrient content. A substantial fraction of biomass nitrogen can be
volatilized during pyrolysis, predominantly as N2 (ref. 69). The nitrogen remaining
in BC typically has negligible availability70. Therefore, no value was assumed for
BC as a nitrogen fertilizer. Up to a maximum of 100% of biomass phosphorus and
potassium was assumed to remain available in the BC. The low end of the
sensitivity range for phosphorus and potassium fertilization value was set at zero,
to represent situations in which combustion ash from a BES might be used to
provide an equivalent nutrient value to BC. At the high end, lignocellulosic
feedstocks of straw, wood or bagasse contain up to 800 mg P kg  1 and
9,000 mg K kg  1 (95% conﬁdence)68. Nutrient use efﬁciency can be approximately
20% lower for organic than mineral fertilizers71,72, therefore, we base nutrient
values on 80% of the equivalent prices of phosphorus in Ca(H2PO4)2 (triple super
phosphate) and potassium in KCl. We use the 2005–2014 price ranges of
$220–860 Mg  1 triple super phosphate and $180–650 Mg  1 KCl (ref. 73).
BC haulage and ﬁeld operations. It was estimated that BC haulage would cost
between $0.26 to $14.17 per Mg feedstock (note that costs would be approximately
four times greater per unit mass of BC), and that associated CO2–C emissions
would be in the range 0.02–1.3 kg C per Mg feedstock, calculated as shown in
Supplementary Table 11, and equations (15–19). Calculation of mean rectilinear
distance (RD) between BEBCS plant and sites for application of BC followed
equations (15–17) below:
CA ¼ Pbc =ARbc

ð15Þ

LA ¼ CA=CD

ð16Þ

pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
LA
2

ð17Þ

RD ¼

Where, CA is the area of cropland amended per year; Pbc is annual BC production;
ARbc is the application rate (mass per unit area) of BC on cropland; LA is the
geographic area over which BC application is dispersed (including both
BC-amended cropland and other intervening land where BC is not applied); and
CD is the cropland density (area of cropland per unit area of landscape).
Then, haulage emissions (HE) and haulage cost (HC) per unit biomass feedstock
are given by equations (18 and 19):
HE ¼ RD EFT Ybc;py

ð18Þ

HC ¼ RD PT Ybc;py

ð19Þ

Where Ybc,py is the yield of BC, and EFT and PT are the haulage emissions and
costs, respectively, per unit distance per Mg of BC.
Field operations to incorporate BC may in some cases coincide with or
substitute for normal tillage and spreading operations (for example, if BC is applied
instead of agricultural lime). Therefore, we use zero cost as the low end of the
sensitivity range for ﬁeld operations. At the high end, ﬁeld operations were
estimated to cost up to $25 ha  1 for spreading, and $24 ha  1 for cultivation and
incorporation (including labour, fuel, lubricant, and tractor and implement
overheads) in cases when ﬁeld operations cannot be combined with normal
operations (for example, in no-till systems) and when it is not possible to use idle
machinery at off-peak times74,75.
Pyrolysis mass and energy balance. Pyrolysis mass and energy balances were
calculated according to the method in ref. 10 (equations (1–14) in Supporting
Information of ref. 10). Pyrolysis temperature was in the range 450–650 °C. Process
heat was assumed to be provided by combustion of a fraction of the combined
gaseous and volatile pyrolysis products, with the remaining pyrolysis gases and
volatiles used as fuel for power generation. Conversion efﬁciency of the power
generation stage was assumed to be equal to that in the BES system. Parasitic power
requirements were assumed to be provided by a fraction of the electricity generated.
BC decomposition. Molar O:C ratio was used as a predictor variable of BC
mineralization rate76. Data relating O:C ratio to estimated half-life were taken from
the metastudy by ref. 76 (Supplementary Fig. 2). The regression of equation (20)
thus yielded a value for the mineralization factor (fd) of 4.89 þ /  1.8 (1 s.d.).
Mineralization rate in the Monte Carlo sensitivity analysis was, therefore, modelled
using equation (20) with values of fd populated from a Gaussian distribution with
mean ¼ 4.89, and s.d. ¼ 1.8. O:C ratio was calculated according to equations (6–8)
in the supporting information of ref. 12. It was assumed that carbon credits would

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:13160 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

9

ARTICLE
be applicable to BC carbon remaining after 100 years.
 
log10 T12 ¼ fd ð1  BCOC Þ

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160

ð20Þ

N2O emissions from soil. Numerous studies have shown reduced N2O emissions
from soil with BC application77. Reduction in soil N2O emissions is correlated with
BC application rate, with the relative reduction varying between 0.17 to 0.91% of
initial emissions per Mg ha  1 BC applied77. Unamended N2O emissions were
calculated assuming the IPPC default N2O–N emission factor of 1.25% of applied
fertilizer N, and N application rates to cropland were assumed to be in the range
25–200 kg N ha  1 per year78. (Supplementary Table 12).
Mechanisms and long-term dynamics of BC’s N2O impacts are still poorly
understood and quantiﬁed. Some evidence suggests that N2O suppression could be
short-lived, decaying over a few years79. We use a sensitivity range of 1–100 year
for the time over which N2O suppression persists, with a logarithmic distribution
to skew probability towards the lower end of this range.
SOC feedback. BC can promote mineralization (an interaction sometimes referred
to as ‘positive priming’) of easily mineralizable non-pyrogenic soil organic carbon
(npSOC), and can also promote stabilization of npSOC, potentially leading to
increased npSOC stocks in the long term (negative priming)21. Considerable
uncertainty remains in the underlying mechanisms for both positive and negative
priming, and in the sizes and longevity of these impacts under differing edaphic
and environmental conditions22,23,80. Nonetheless, the ranges of published
measurements of the magnitude of BC’s priming effect on npSOC turnover and
stabilization can be used to modify rate constants in established SOC turnover
models to estimate the possible range of priming impacts on long term npSOC
stocks22. Applying this methodology to the RothC soil carbon model, while
accounting also for impacts of BC on NPP, indicates that BC could potentially alter
npSOC stocks over 100 years by up to  0.03 to þ 0.3 Mg npSOC per Mg BC C
added. We adopt this method from Woolf and Lehmann22, applied over a 100 year
time frame, to estimate the potential impact on npSOC within the sensitivity range
of  0.03 to þ 0.3 mg npSOC per mg BC-C. The net magnitude of BEBCS
sequestered carbon was then adjusted by adding the (positive or negative) npSOC
feedback to the quantity of BC remaining in the soil. We note, however, that the
value of any possible increase in npSOC may be challenging to internalize into
carbon markets unless signiﬁcant advances in understanding of the underlying
mechanisms allow them to be predicted within tighter conﬁdence limits.
Code availability. Computer code to reproduce these results is available under
GNU General Public License Version 3, at https://github.com/domwoolf/nets1.
Data availability. All data required to repeat this experiment are provided within
the article and the Supplementary Information. The data are also included in the
computer code available for download (see Code Availability).

References
1. Azar, C. & Rodhe, H. Targets for stabilization of atmospheric CO2. Science 276,
1818–1819 (1997).
2. Randalls, S. History of the 2 °C climate target. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Clim.
Change 1, 598–605 (2010).
3. Clarke, L. et al.in Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change.
Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (eds Edenhofer, O. R. et al.)
413–510 (Cambridge University Press, 2014).
4. Fuss, S., Reuter, W. H., Szolgayová, J. & Obersteiner, M. Optimal mitigation
strategies with negative emission technologies and carbon sinks under
uncertainty. Clim. Change 118, 73–87 (2013).
5. van Vuuren, D. P. et al. The role of negative CO2 emissions for reaching
2 °C—insights from integrated assessment modelling. Clim. Change 118, 15–27
(2013).
6. Fuss, S. et al. Betting on negative emissions. Nat. Clim. Change 4, 850–853
(2014).
7. Woolf, D., Amonette, J. E., Street-Perrott, F. A., Lehmann, J. & Joseph, S.
Sustainable biochar to mitigate global climate change. Nat. Commun. 1, 1–9
(2010).
8. Glaser, B. Prehistorically modiﬁed soils of central Amazonia: a model for
sustainable agriculture in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol.
Sci. 362, 187–196 (2007).
9. Lehmann, J. A handful of carbon. Nature 447, 143–144 (2007).
10. Woolf, D., Lehmann, J., Fisher, E. M. & Angenent, L. T. Biofuels from pyrolysis
in perspective: trade-offs between energy yields and soil-carbon additions.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 48, 6492–6499 (2014).
11. Gaunt, J. L. & Lehmann, J. Energy balance and emissions associated with
biochar sequestration and pyrolysis bioenergy production. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 42, 4152–4158 (2008).
10

12. Field, J. L., Keske, C. M. H., Birch, G. L., DeFoort, M. W. & Cotrufo, M. F.
Distributed biochar and bioenergy coproduction: a regionally speciﬁc case
study of environmental beneﬁts and economic impacts. GCB Bioenergy 5,
177–191 (2013).
13. Azar, C. et al. The feasibility of low CO2 concentration targets and the role
of bio-energy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS). Clim. Change 100,
195–202 (2010).
14. Koelbl, B. S., van den Broek, M. A., van Ruijven, B. J., Faaij, A. P. C. &
van Vuuren, D. P. Uncertainty in the deployment of carbon capture and
storage (CCS): a sensitivity analysis to techno-economic parameter uncertainty.
Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control 27, 81–102 (2014).
15. Rubin, E. S., Chen, C. & Rao, A. B. Cost and performance of fossil
fuel power plants with CO2 capture and storage. Energ. Policy 35, 4444–4454
(2007).
16. Jeffery, S., Verheijen, F. G. A., van der Velde, M. & Bastos, A. C. A quantitative
review of the effects of biochar application to soils on crop productivity using
meta-analysis. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 144, 175–187 (2011).
17. Crane-Droesch, A., Abiven, S., Jeffery, S. & Torn, M. S. Heterogeneous global
crop yield response to biochar: a meta-regression analysis. Environ. Res. Lett. 8,
44049 (2013).
18. Cayuela, M. L. et al. Biochar and denitriﬁcation in soils: when, how much and
why does biochar reduce N2O emissions? Sci. Rep. 3, 1732 (2013).
19. Godfray, H. C. J. et al. Food security: the challenge of feeding 9 billion people.
Science 327, 812–818 (2010).
20. Spokas, K. A. & Reicosky, D. C. Impacts of sixteen different biochars on soil
greenhouse gas production. Ann. Environ. Sci. 3, 4 (2009).
21. Zimmerman, A. R., Gao, B. & Ahn, M.-Y. Positive and negative carbon
mineralization priming effects among a variety of biochar-amended soils.
Soil Biol. Biochem. 43, 1169–1179 (2011).
22. Woolf, D. & Lehmann, J. Modelling the long-term response to positive and
negative priming of soil organic carbon by black carbon. Biogeochemistry 111,
83–95 (2012).
23. Singh, B. P. & Cowie, A. L. Long-term inﬂuence of biochar on
native organic carbon mineralisation in a low-carbon clayey soil. Sci. Rep. 4,
3687 (2014).
24. Breiman, L. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 45, 5–32 (2001).
25. Mukherjee, A. & Lal, R. The biochar dilemma. Soil Res. 52, 217–230 (2014).
26. Lehmann, J. & Rillig, M. Distinguishing variability from uncertainty. Nat. Clim.
Change 4, 153–153 (2014).
27. Jeffery, S., Verheijen, F. G. A., Bastos, A. C. & Van Der Velde, M. A comment
on ‘Biochar and its effects on plant productivity and nutrient cycling: a
meta-analysis’: on the importance of accurate reporting in supporting a
fast-moving research ﬁeld with policy implications. GCB Bioenergy 6, 176–179
(2014).
28. Smith, P. et al. Biophysical and economic limits to negative CO2 emissions.
Nat. Clim. Change 6, 42–50 (2016).
29. Bustamante, M. et al. Co-beneﬁts, trade-offs, barriers and policies for
greenhouse gas mitigation in the agriculture, forestry and other land use
(AFOLU) sector. Glob. Change Biol. 20, 3270–3290 (2014).
30. Creutzig, F. et al. Bioenergy and climate change mitigation: an assessment.
GCB Bioenergy 7, 916–944 (2015).
31. Smith, P. Soil carbon sequestration and biochar as negative emission
technologies. Glob. Change Biol. 22, 1315–1324 (2016).
32. Bonsch, M. et al. Trade-offs between land and water requirements for
large-scale bioenergy production. GCB Bioenergy 8, 11–24 (2016).
33. Krey, V. et al.in Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change.
Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (eds Edenhofer, O. R. et al.)
1308–1328 (Cambridge University Press, 2014).
34. Myhre, G. et al.in Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (eds Stocker, T. F. et al.) 659–740
(Cambridge University Press, 2013).
35. Stern, N. H., Britain, G. & Treasury, H. M. Stern Review: The Economics of
Climate Change (HM treasury, 2006).
36. Nordhaus, W. D. A review of the stern review on the economics of climate
change. J. Econ. Lit. 45, 686–702 (2007).
37. Weitzman, M. L. A review of the stern review on the economics of climate
change. J. Econ. Lit. 45, 703–724 (2007).
38. Bruckner, T. et al.in Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change.
Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (eds Edenhofer, O. R. et al.)
511–597 (Cambridge University Press, 2013).
39. IEA. Energy Prices and Taxes. Available at http://www.iea.org/statistics/topics/
pricesandtaxes (2014).
40. EnerData. Long Term Energy Scenarios. Available at http://www.enerdata.net/
enerdatauk/press-and-publication/publications/understanding-energy-future.
phpEnerData, 2014).

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:13160 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

ARTICLE

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160

41. Herzog, H. et al. in IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and
Storage. (eds Metz, B., Davidson, O., Coninck, H., Loos, M. & Meyer, L.) 339–
362 (Cambridge University Press, 2005).
42. Mott MacDonald. UK Electricity Generation Costs Update. Available at
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/ﬁle/
65716/71-uk-electricity-generation-costs-update-.pdf (2010).
43. Finkenrath, M., & IEA. IEAGHG. Potential for Biomass and Carbon Dioxide
Capture and Storage (IEAGHG, 2011).
44. Finkenrath, M. & IEA. Cost and Performance of Carbon Dioxide Capture from
Power Generation (OECD Publishing, 2011).
45. NETL. Updated Costs (June 2011 Basis) for Selected Bituminous Baseline Cases
(National Energy Technology Laboratory, 2012).
46. Rubin, E. S., Davison, J. E. & Herzog, H. J. The cost of CO2 capture and storage.
Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control 40, 378–400 (2015).
47. Rubin, E. S. Understanding the pitfalls of CCS cost estimates. Int. J. Greenh. Gas
Control 10, 181–190 (2012).
48. NETL. Carbon Management GIS: CO2 Pipeline Transport Cost Estimation
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2009).
49. Rubin, E. S., Yeh, S., Antes, M., Berkenpas, M. & Davison, J. Use of experience
curves to estimate the future cost of power plants with CO2 capture. Int. J.
Greenh. Gas Control 1, 188–197 (2007).
50. Ganesh, A. & Banerjee, R. Biomass pyrolysis for power generation—a potential
technology. Renew. Energy 22, 9–14 (2001).
51. Bridgwater, A. V., Toft, A. J. & Brammer, J. G. A techno-economic comparison
of power production by biomass fast pyrolysis with gasiﬁcation and
combustion. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 6, 181–246 (2002).
52. Bridgwater, A. V. The technical and economic feasibility of biomass gasiﬁcation
for power generation. Fuel 74, 631–653 (1995).
53. Caputo, A. C., Palumbo, M., Pelagagge, P. M. & Scacchia, F. Economics
of biomass energy utilization in combustion and gasiﬁcation plants: effects of
logistic variables. Biomass Bioenergy 28, 35–51 (2005).
54. Shabangu, S., Woolf, D., Fisher, E. M., Angenent, L. T. & Lehmann, J.
Techno-economic assessment of biomass slow pyrolysis into different biochar
and methanol concepts. Fuel 117, 742–748 (2014).
55. Mathieu, P. & Dubuisson, R. Performance analysis of a biomass gasiﬁer.
Energy Convers. Manag. 43, 1291–1299 (2002).
56. Prins, M. J., Ptasinski, K. J. & Janssen, F. J. J. G. From coal to biomass
gasiﬁcation: comparison of thermodynamic efﬁciency. Energy 32, 1248–1259
(2007).
57. Sohi, S. P., Krull, E., Lopez-Capel, E. & Bol, R. A review of biochar and its use
and function in soil. Adv. Agron Vol. 105 (ed. Sparks, D. L.) 47–82 (Academic
Press, 2010).
58. Atkinson, C. J., Fitzgerald, J. D. & Hipps, N. A. Potential mechanisms for
achieving agricultural beneﬁts from biochar application to temperate soils:
a review. Plant Soil 337, 1–18 (2010).
59. FAO. FAOSTAT. Available at http://faostat3.fao.org/ (2016).
60. Hertel, T. W., Burke, M. B. & Lobell, D. B. The poverty implications of
climate-induced crop yield changes by 2030. Glob. Environ. Change 20,
577–585 (2010).
61. Baldos, U. L. C. & Hertel, T. W. Global food security in 2050: the role of
agricultural productivity and climate change. Aust. J. Agric. Resour. Econ. 58,
554–570 (2014).
62. Calzadilla, A. et al. Climate change impacts on global agriculture. Clim. Change
120, 357–374 (2013).
63. Lobell, D. B., Baldos, U. L. C. & Hertel, T. W. Climate adaptation as mitigation:
the case of agricultural investments. Environ. Res. Lett. 8, 15012 (2013).
64. Nelson, G. C. et al. Agriculture and climate change in global scenarios:
why don’t the models agree. Agric. Econ. 45, 85–101 (2014).
65. Nelson, G. et al. Food Security, Farming, and Climate Change to 2050:
Scenarios, Results, Policy Options (International Food Policy Research Institute,
2010).
66. Porter, J. R. et al.in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel of
Climate Change (eds Field, C. B. et al.) 485–533 (Cambridge University Press,
2014).

67. Gerland, P. et al. World population stabilization unlikely this century.
Science 346, 234–237 (2014).
68. ECN. Phyllis2—Database for biomass and waste. Available at
https://www.ecn.nl/phyllis2 (2015).
69. Becidan, M., Skreiberg, Ø. & Hustad, J. E. Products distribution and gas release
in pyrolysis of thermally thick biomass residues samples. J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis
78, 207–213 (2007).
70. Rajkovich, S. et al. Corn growth and nitrogen nutrition after additions of
biochars with varying properties to a temperate soil. Biol. Fertil. Soils 48,
271–284 (2012).
71. Seufert, V., Ramankutty, N. & Foley, J. A. Comparing the yields of organic and
conventional agriculture. Nature 485, 229–232 (2012).
72. Ponisio, L. C. et al. Diversiﬁcation practices reduce organic to conventional
yield gap. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 282, 20141396 (2015).
73. World Bank. Prospects—Commodity Markets (Pink Sheets). Available at
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROSPECTS/Resources/3349341304428586133/pink_data_a.xlsx (2015).
74. Stein, D. Custom Machine and Work Rate Estimates (Michigan State University
Extension, 2015).
75. University of Illinois Extension. Machinery Cost Estimates: Summary. Available
at http://farmdoc.illinois.edu/manage/machinery/summary_2015.pdfUniversity
of Illinois, 2015).
76. Spokas, K. Review of the stability of biochar in soils: predictability of O:C molar
ratios. Carbon Manag. 1, 289–303 (2010).
77. Cayuela, M. L. et al. Biochar’s role in mitigating soil nitrous oxide emissions:
a review and meta-analysis. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 191, 5–16 (2014).
78. Liu, J. et al. A high-resolution assessment on global nitrogen ﬂows in cropland.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 107, 8035–8040 (2010).
79. Spokas, K. A. Impact of biochar ﬁeld aging on laboratory greenhouse gas
production potentials. GCB Bioenergy 5, 165–176 (2013).
80. Whitman, T., Enders, A. & Lehmann, J. Pyrogenic carbon additions to soil
counteract positive priming of soil carbon mineralization by plants. Soil Biol.
Biochem. 73, 33–41 (2014).

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Fondation des Fondateurs for supporting this work.

Author contributions
D.W. led the model development and manuscript preparation. J.L. and D.L. provided
advisory support, checking of model assumptions, model validation and prooﬁng of the
manuscript.

Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/
naturecommunications
Competing ﬁnancial interests: The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
How to cite this article: Woolf, D. et al. Optimal bioenergy power generation for climate
change mitigation with or without carbon sequestration. Nat. Commun. 7, 13160
doi: 10.1038/ncomms13160 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise
in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license,
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material.
To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

r The Author(s) 2016

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:13160 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13160 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

11

